Desktop application
===================

Environment note
----------------
All training and dataset generation ran under WSL2 (Ubuntu 22.04) with GPU.
Paths in those notebooks point at /home/admins/ and reflect that environment.
Phase 4 onward runs on Windows, CPU only - inference and demo work, no training.
Paths here point at D:\lipreading_workbench\.
Both environments verified equivalent: same model, same test set, 0.7150 and
0.7556 to four decimal places.
albumentations does not install on Windows Python 3.11, so dataset generation
is WSL-only. See docs/environment/ for exact versions.


1. Why an application was built
-------------------------------
The original project demonstrated the system through two separate pieces
running at once. A local Python process opened an OpenCV window showing the
camera feed, while a Flask server exposed through ngrok served a web page that
reported what the system was doing. The two were split because video could not
be transmitted to the web page reliably over that connection.

This worked, but it was awkward to present. The audience had to look at two
places at once, and the arrangement only existed because of a network
limitation rather than because it was a good design.

A desktop application removes the limitation entirely rather than working
around it. When the camera, the models and the interface all run in one
process, there is no network boundary for video to cross. The preview and the
status reporting can sit in the same window because nothing has to be
transmitted anywhere.

The application is at src/app/lip_reading_app.py. It uses Tkinter, which is
part of the Python standard library and therefore adds no dependency. The
visual design follows the original web interface: a dark background, a header
naming the system, and blue accent text for results.

An alternative was considered and rejected. A webview-based approach would have
allowed the original HTML and CSS to be reused exactly, but it would have added
a dependency and a bridge between Python and JavaScript. Since the original
design is a header and a message area rather than anything structurally
complex, rebuilding it in Tkinter was the simpler path.


2. How the application was built
--------------------------------
Development proceeded in four steps, each producing something that could be run
and checked before the next began.

The first step extracted the pipeline functions from the notebook into
src/pipeline.py so that the notebook and the application could share one
implementation. This is described in the accompanying document on the live
inference pipeline.

The second step built a window containing only the camera preview with hand
landmarks drawn, and a status line. This was deliberately minimal because the
main technical risk lay here: OpenCV frames have to reach a Tkinter widget
without blocking the interface. Three details make this work. The camera is
opened on a background thread, because the roughly twenty second startup would
otherwise freeze the window before it could draw anything. Frames are scheduled
through Tkinter's own event loop rather than read in a loop, because a blocking
loop would prevent the window from redrawing. A reference to the current image
is held on the application object, because otherwise Python discards it
immediately and the preview stays blank.

The third step moved the gesture logic into the window. The functions that
recognise an open hand and a closed fist are taken from the notebook unchanged,
as are the recording timer, the frame counter and the three hundred frame
safety limit. Frames accumulate in memory during recording and are written to
disk on a background thread afterwards.

The fourth step connected the pipeline and presented the results. After the
frames are saved, normalisation, cropping, grid assembly, word recognition and
sentence generation run on a background thread, so that the preview continues
during the several seconds this takes. Each step reports itself in the status
line as it happens.


3. Interface design
-------------------
Two decisions shaped the final layout, and both came from watching the
application in use rather than from planning.

The first concerns progress messages. An early version presented every step as
a message in a scrolling list, in the style of a chat interface. This was
rejected for two reasons. Progress information is useful to a developer and of
little interest to anyone else, so giving it the most prominent part of the
window was the wrong emphasis. A scrolling history also accumulated messages
that no longer mattered, which drew attention away from the current state.
Progress is now a single line in the footer that is replaced as work proceeds.

Building each message as a new set of widgets also cost measurable performance,
so replacing the list with a single label improved the frame rate as well.

The second decision concerns results. The recognised word, its confidence and
the generated sentence appear in a dedicated area below the video, which is
hidden until there is something to show. There is no history, because a
previous result has no bearing on the current one. Pressing the button to
record another word clears the result along with the stored frames, and the
footer says so before the button is pressed rather than interrupting with a
dialogue afterwards.

The footer places all text on the left, with a waiting indicator beneath the
status line, and both buttons on the right. Keeping the text in one column
means the reader's attention does not have to move across the window.

A session can be repeated without restarting. The button that clears the
previous recording leaves the camera open, so a second word can be recorded
immediately rather than waiting again for the camera to initialise.


4. Frame rate
-------------
The application initially ran at about 17 frames per second, below the 18.3
measured in the notebook. Since the frame rate determines how much elapsed time
the sixty captured frames cover, and therefore how closely the recording
matches the two second training clips, this was worth investigating.

Rather than guess, the loop was instrumented to time its three parts
separately. This showed roughly 15 milliseconds spent reading from the camera,
21 milliseconds in MediaPipe hand detection, and 2.6 milliseconds drawing the
preview, against a budget of 59 milliseconds per frame at 17 frames per second.
The measurement was necessary because an earlier assumption had been wrong: the
image passed to MediaPipe had been reduced in size on the theory that detection
cost scales with resolution, and this produced no improvement at all.

Three changes together raised the rate to about 24 frames per second. The
preview image is now written into an existing buffer rather than allocated
fresh for every frame. The next frame is scheduled as an idle callback rather
than on a one millisecond timer, because the timer's actual resolution is
coarser than requested and was adding delay. MediaPipe's model complexity was
reduced to its lighter setting, which lowered detection cost from 21 to 18
milliseconds. Gesture recognition was tested repeatedly afterwards and remained
reliable, which is unsurprising given that an open hand and a closed fist are
coarse shapes.

At 24 frames per second, sixty frames spans about 2.5 seconds, against about
two seconds for the training clips. This is closer to the training material
than the notebook manages.


5. Lighting affects the frame rate
----------------------------------
An unexpected finding emerged during this work. The frame rate depends on the
lighting in the room.

The timing measurements show why. With the room lights off, reading a frame
from the camera took between 14 and 17 milliseconds. With them on, the same
operation took between 9 and 11 milliseconds, and the frame rate rose from 16.7
to 18.8. The camera sensor uses a longer exposure in low light in order to
gather enough light, and the call that reads a frame waits for that exposure to
complete.

This matters because it is a second and entirely separate mechanism by which
lighting affects the system. The first is straightforward: better lighting
produces clearer images for the model to work from. The second is that better
lighting produces a higher frame rate, which changes how much time the sixty
captured frames represent and therefore how closely the recording matches the
training material.

Neither mechanism was anticipated. The recollection that the original
demonstration worked better under good lighting now has two explanations behind
it rather than one.


6. Model files and substitution
-------------------------------
The three model files are not bundled with the application. They are expected
in a models folder beside it, alongside the class label file.

The reasoning is worth recording.. The model is trained on one speaker's lips, so
there is no general audience who will speak into this application and get good
results. The realistic audience is a developer reading the repository, and for
that reader a visible models folder is more useful than a sealed binary,
because it allows a different model to be substituted without rebuilding
anything.

There is a limit to that substitution which should be stated plainly. Replacing
a path in the configuration is sufficient only for a model of the same kind.
The word recognition path loads a Keras model in HDF5 format, feeds it a
224x224 three channel image and expects ten class probabilities. The sentence
generation path loads a T5-compatible directory and calls it with a specific
prompt format. A different architecture, such as a convolutional network
combined with a recurrent layer, or a transformer other than T5, would require
changes to the surrounding code and not only to the path.

The configuration constants are named for what they hold rather than
generically, for this reason. A generic name would suggest an
interchangeability that the code does not provide.


7. Running the application
--------------------------
From the project root, with the environment active:

    cd src\app
    python lip_reading_app.py

The application loads the word recognition model, then the sentence generation
model, then opens the camera, reporting each stage as it goes. Once the camera
is ready, showing an open hand to the camera begins recording and a closed fist
ends it. The recognised word and the generated sentence appear below the video.
The button beneath clears the result and allows another word to be recorded
without reopening the camera.