Web application
===============

Environment note
----------------
All training and dataset generation ran under WSL2 (Ubuntu 22.04) with GPU.
Paths in those notebooks point at /home/admins/ and reflect that environment.
Phase 4 onward runs on Windows, CPU only - inference and demo work, no training.
Paths here point at D:\lipreading_workbench\.
Both environments verified equivalent: same model, same test set, 0.7150 and
0.7556 to four decimal places.
albumentations does not install on Windows Python 3.11, so dataset generation
is WSL-only. See docs/environment/ for exact versions.


1. Why this exists alongside the desktop application
----------------------------------------------------
The original project was demonstrated through two pieces running at once. A
local process opened an OpenCV window showing the camera feed, while a web page
served separately reported what the system was doing at each step. The two were
kept apart because video could not be transmitted to the page reliably.

The desktop application replaces that arrangement with a single window and is
the better way to show the system to someone who simply wants to use it. This
document describes a second demonstration that deliberately keeps the original
two-window form.

Reproducing a project means showing what was actually built, not only what it
became. If the original presentation no longer runs, a reader has no way to see
what the desktop application improved upon, and the improvement becomes
invisible. Keeping both makes the comparison available rather than asserted.

The two also suit different readers. The web page keeps every status message
from a session visible at once, which is what someone trying to understand how
the system works wants to see. The desktop application replaces each message
with the next and shows only the final result, which is what someone using the
system wants. Neither is better in general.

Implementation: src/app/lip_reading_web_app.py, with the page at
src/app/templates/index.html and its image at src/app/static/favicon.ico.


2. What was kept and what was changed
-------------------------------------
The original web application is preserved unchanged in src/archive. It was used
here only as a reference for how the server was arranged and how the page
polled it. None of its processing logic was carried across, because that logic
was rebuilt and corrected earlier and now lives in src/pipeline.py, which this
demonstration imports. The desktop application imports the same module, so the
two run identical processing by construction.

The page itself follows the original closely. It polls a status endpoint once
per second, clears its message area and rebuilds it from the response, which is
what produced the original conversational appearance. That behaviour is
deliberately unchanged, because it is the thing being shown.

Four changes were made.

The tunnelling service was removed. The original exposed the local server to
the public internet through a tunnel, even though the browser was running on
the same machine as the server. This served no purpose and was the genuine
defect in the original arrangement. Flask serves the page on the local
interface directly, so the tunnel was deleted rather than replaced.

The status list is now guarded by a lock. The web server answers requests on one
thread while the camera loop runs on another, and a list being appended to while
it is read can fail. The original had no such protection.

The avatar image is served locally rather than fetched from an image hosting
site, so the page no longer needs an internet connection to display correctly.

The frame rate improvements found while building the desktop application were
applied here as well, so both demonstrations behave the same way.


3. How a session runs
---------------------
Both models load first, then the camera opens, and each stage reports itself to
the page as it happens. Once the camera is ready, showing an open hand begins
recording and a closed fist ends it. The captured frames are then normalised,
cropped, assembled into a grid, classified and used to generate a sentence,
with every step reported.

The processing runs on a separate thread from the camera loop. Without this the
preview would freeze on its last frame for the several seconds the pipeline
takes, which looked like the application had stopped responding.

The recognised word and the generated sentence are shown differently from the
progress messages: in green, and aligned to the opposite side of the window.
These are the only two lines a reader actually needs, so distinguishing them
from the running commentary matters.

A session can be repeated without restarting. The camera stays open between
recordings, so a second word can be recorded immediately rather than waiting
again for the camera to initialise. This was worth adding because the original
had no such delay to begin with: it opened the camera quickly, so restarting
the whole demonstration was tolerable. The current version takes about twenty
seconds to open the camera, which makes restarting for every word unreasonable.

Pressing the button clears the message history before the next session begins.
The alternative, keeping every session's messages, was considered and rejected.
The value of this page is that a full trail from camera setup to generated
sentence is visible at once, and several sessions accumulated together would
obscure exactly that. A message before the button explains that pressing it
clears what is above.


4. Frame rate
-------------
This demonstration runs at about 19.9 frames per second, against about 24 for
the desktop application, both measured over the recording itself.

The difference is the web server. It answers a status request every second on
one thread while the camera loop runs on another, and the two contend for the
interpreter. The desktop application has no such contention.

This is worth stating rather than hiding, because it is a real cost of the
two-part arrangement and one more respect in which the single-window
application is the better design. It is not a large cost: both figures are well
above what the original managed, and both are far enough above the rate at
which gestures and speech are captured usefully.


5. Running it
-------------
From the project root, with the environment active:

    cd src\app
    python lip_reading_web_app.py

Then open the address printed in the terminal in a browser. The camera window
appears a few seconds later, so it is worth opening the page first in order to
watch the startup messages arrive.