Live inference pipeline - webcam capture to CNN word prediction
===============================================================

Environment note
----------------
All training and dataset generation ran under WSL2 (Ubuntu 22.04) with GPU.
Paths in those notebooks point at /home/admins/ and reflect that environment.
Phase 4 onward runs on Windows, CPU only - inference and demo work, no training.
Paths here point at D:\lipreading_workbench\.
Both environments verified equivalent: same model, same test set, 0.7150 and
0.7556 to four decimal places.
albumentations does not install on Windows Python 3.11, so dataset generation
is WSL-only. See docs/environment/ for exact versions.


1. Scope
--------
This stage covers the complete path from webcam to generated sentence:

  hand gesture (MediaPipe) starts and stops capture
    -> frames held in memory, written to runtime/extracted_frames/
    -> normalised to exactly 60 frames
    -> lip region cropped per frame with dlib 68-point landmarks (48-68),
       output 112x80, written to runtime/cropped_frames/
    -> 60 crops tiled into one 10-row x 6-column grid (672x800)
    -> resized to 224x224, both written to runtime/grids/
    -> 2D CNN classifies into one of 10 words
    -> fine-tuned T5-small generates a sentence containing that word

Implementation: src/app/lip_reading_inference_demo.ipynb, with the pipeline
functions themselves in src/pipeline.py.
Models: models/model_rebuilt_data.h5 (51,434,058 parameters, input 224x224x3),
models/t5_fine_tuned_local/, models/shape_predictor_68_face_landmarks.dat
Labels: models/class_labels_cl10.json
Classes: bat, cup, drop, eat, fish, hot, jump, milk, pen, red


2. No intermediate video file
-----------------------------
The original 2024 deployment path wrote an .mp4 with cv2.VideoWriter and then
re-read it to extract frames. That is not done here for two reasons.

The mp4v codec failed on Windows OpenCV, and calling video_writer.write()
inside the capture loop was the main source of capture lag.

The pipeline only ever needed 60 frames, not a video container. Frames now
accumulate in a Python list during capture and are written to
runtime/extracted_frames/ after the preview window closes.

runtime/ is cleared at the start of every capture by clear_runtime(). This
also removes the stale-frame hazard present in the original web_app path,
where cropped_frames was never emptied between runs and a short recording
could leave old crops in place, producing a grid assembled from two different
recordings.


3. Camera setup
---------------
cv2.CAP_DSHOW opens instantly but caps throughput at about 10 fps. Bare
cv2.VideoCapture(0) and cv2.CAP_MSMF both run at full speed but take roughly 21
seconds to open.

The startup cost is not avoidable, so it is relocated rather than removed.
Camera opening lives in its own notebook cell, run before the demo begins, and
the capture cell reuses the already-open handle. Measured result: camera
initialisation 22.09s in its own cell, MediaPipe initialisation 0.01s, time to
first preview 0.15s. MSMF was not faster than the bare constructor; the
improvement came from moving the open into a separate cell rather than from the
backend choice.

cv2.waitKey(10) was reduced to cv2.waitKey(1), which gave a real throughput
improvement.

The capture resolution must be 1920x1080, for the reasons set out in section 4.

Throughput in the notebook measures 18.3 fps at 1080p against 20.8 fps at 720p,
both stable across repeated runs. The camera reports 30.0 fps; the gap is the
per-frame cost of MediaPipe hand detection, colour conversion and preview
rendering. At 18.3 fps, 60 frames spans about 3.3 seconds, whereas the original
training clips were 30 fps and 60 frames spanned about 2 seconds. The desktop
application described in the accompanying document reaches about 24 fps through
changes that do not apply to a notebook, where 60 frames spans about 2.5
seconds. Both figures are recorded differences from the training material
rather than something corrected for.


4. Capture resolution and mouth size - the main finding of this stage
--------------------------------------------------------------------
The lip crop takes the dlib mouth bounding box and pads it outward to reach a
fixed 112x80 pixels, then resizes. The padding is a fixed pixel count, not a
proportion. How much surrounding face ends up inside the crop therefore
depends entirely on how many pixels wide the mouth is in the source frame.

Measured mouth bounding boxes (dlib landmarks 48-68):

  Source                          	mean width    mean height
  original phone video, 720x1280     133.4          69.0
  webcam 1280x720                     67.3          31.6
  webcam 1920x1080                   108.7          51.7

The figures for the original recordings are from all 600 source videos, 5
frames sampled per video, 3000 frames measured, zero detection failures. The
webcam figures are from single 60-frame captures at ordinary seated distance.

At 720p the mouth is roughly half the target width, so padding adds about 22
pixels per side horizontally and 24 vertically. That padding is cheek, nose
and chin, and the resulting crops do not resemble the training data.

At 1080p the mouth is just under the 112 target width, so horizontal padding
is near zero and vertical padding is small. The crops match the training data
in composition.

The general rule: crop quality depends only on the mouth's size in pixels.
Camera distance and capture resolution trade off directly against each other,
because the crop code cannot distinguish sitting closer from capturing at
higher resolution. Halving the distance and doubling the linear resolution
have the same effect. A mouth width in roughly the 100 to 135 pixel range
produces training-like crops.

Consequence: no scale-normalisation code was added. Setting the webcam to
1080p is sufficient, and the preprocessing therefore remains identical to
src/data_prep/generate_rebuilt_dataset.ipynb.

A per-frame scale factor was considered and rejected. Mouth height varies with
mouth opening, which is the signal the model reads; normalising each frame to
a constant mouth size would suppress the opening and closing across the 60
frames. If scale normalisation is ever needed, it must use a single factor per
recording, derived from median mouth width, never per frame.


5. Frame count normalisation
----------------------------
Utterance length varies. A one-syllable word can finish in well under two
seconds, and the original source videos ranged roughly 1.4 to 2.5 seconds, 
so raw extraction gave more or fewer than 60 frames. The rule is unchanged 
from generate_rebuilt_dataset.ipynb:

  fewer than 60  - repeat the final frame until 60 is reached
  more than 60   - discard 80 percent of the excess from the end and the
                   remainder from the start

The lips are closed at both ends of a recording and the middle carries the
signal, which is why trimming is weighted toward the end.

Trimming and padding operate on the in-memory frame list before anything is
written, so files on disk are always numbered 01 to 60.

Observed across the ten test captures in section 6: 52 to 63 source frames,
padding in seven cases, trimming in two, exact in one.


6. Lip cropping and detection failures
--------------------------------------
Cropping is ported unchanged from generate_rebuilt_dataset.ipynb: dlib frontal
face detector, 68-point predictor, landmarks 48 to 68, bounding rectangle,
padding to 112x80, resize.

The fill_gaps routine is retained and is essential. dlib does not detect every
frame reliably. In the original project this was handled by reshooting until a 
clean take was obtained, but a live demo has no such luxury. When detection 
fails on a frame, the crop is filled from the nearest successful neighbour: 
a leading gap fills forward, a trailing gap fills backward, and an interior 
gap is split between the frames on either side. Sixty frames in always 
produces sixty crops out.

Two changes from the training version, both because this processes one
recording in-process rather than 600 in a process pool: the detector and
predictor are loaded once at module level rather than through a worker
initialiser, and the predictor path points at models/ in this codebase.

Across the ten test captures, dlib detected all 60 frames in every run and
fill_gaps was never invoked.


7. Grid assembly and prediction
-------------------------------
Sixty 112x80 crops are tiled into a 10-row by 6-column grid, giving 672x800,
placed by index with row = idx // 6 and column = idx % 6. The grid is resized
to 224x224 with PIL LANCZOS. Both are written to runtime/grids/.

The 6-column by 10-row layout is the closest-to-square arrangement for 60 cells
of 112x80 and is the original design decision. It converts video classification
into image classification so that an ordinary 2D CNN can be used.

The resized grid is read back with PIL, converted to RGB, divided by 255 and
passed to the model. This matches the preprocessing the training generator
applied.

Verified at load: 51,434,058 parameters and input shape (None, 224, 224, 3),
both matching the Phase 2 figures for this model.


8. Live capture observations
----------------------------
Ten single-take captures, one per word, recorded in an ordinary daytime room
on the darker side, seated at normal desk distance.

  spoken   predicted   confidence   second place
  bat      milk        0.4880       fish   0.3295
  cup      cup         0.3985       jump   0.2318
  drop     jump        0.4859       drop   0.2975
  eat      eat         0.5313       fish   0.3158
  fish     fish        0.9626       milk   0.0240
  hot      jump        0.4399       hot    0.4010
  jump     jump        0.5329       eat    0.1588
  milk     milk        0.7106       pen    0.1138
  pen      pen         0.5178       drop   0.1643
  red      eat         0.6100       jump   0.1180

Six of ten matched. Of the four that did not, drop and hot had the spoken word
in second place, hot within 0.04 of the top. Red had it third. Bat is the only
case where the spoken word was absent from the top three.

These are NOT an accuracy measurement and must not be compared with the 71.50
percent full-test or 75.56 percent real-only figures. Those come from held-out
sets of 200 and 90 images under a session-based split. This is ten single
takes by a speaker who knows in advance what he is saying, in one lighting
condition, on different hardware, with no repetition. It demonstrates that the
chain runs end to end and produces plausible output. Nothing more should be
read into it.

Two patterns are noted without being claimed as findings. Jump was predicted
three times, twice incorrectly. Confidence does not separate correct from
incorrect predictions: the highest incorrect was 0.6100 and the lowest correct
0.3985, so no usable threshold exists.

What these runs do rule out is a preprocessing problem. Mouth widths ranged
104.6 to 116.3 across all ten, inside the range established in section 4, and
dlib detected every frame in every run with no gap filling anywhere.


9. Known train-inference differences
------------------------------------
The following differences between training conditions and live capture are
recorded here rather than corrected for.

Camera hardware- The training data came from a phone camera and the demo runs 
on a Logitech webcam, so sensor, optics and internal processing all differ.

Aspect ratio- Training video was 720x1280 portrait, the webcam is 1920x1080
landscape, so the face occupies a different fraction of the frame.

Temporal scale- The temporal scale differs. Sixty frames spans about 3.3 seconds 
when captured from the notebook at 18.3 fps, or about 2.5 seconds from the desktop
application at 24 fps, against about 2 seconds in the training clips. The
application is therefore closer to the training material than the notebook is,
though neither matches it exactly.

Lighting- The dataset was recorded in reasonably lit conditions throughout and 
contains little lighting variation. Live performance in dim conditions is
therefore extrapolation beyond the training distribution. Better performance
under good lighting is expected but was not tested in this stage.

Speaker dependence- The model is trained on one speaker's lips. It is a
speaker-dependent system and is not expected to work for anyone else. This is
a property of the dataset, not a defect.

None of these are addressable without new data, and no new samples will be
added to the dataset because this is a reconstruction of the 2024 project
rather than new research.


10. Defects in the original deployment path
-------------------------------------------
The original project had a working deployment path in web_app.ipynb and
integration.ipynb, both of which now sit unchanged in src/archive/. A review of
those files identified four defects. None of them appear in the rebuilt path
described above, because that path was written from the dataset generation
notebook rather than adapted from the older deployment code. The defects are
recorded here so that the review is visible to a reader, and the archive files
are deliberately left uncorrected because they are the record of how the
original project ran.

The first defect concerned frame trimming. Where a recording produced more than
sixty frames, the training pipeline discarded eighty percent of the excess from
the end and the remainder from the start, on the reasoning that the lips are
closed at both ends of a recording and the informative movement lies in the
middle. The deployment code did not follow this. One file removed eighty
percent from the start, and the other removed ninety percent from the start,
which meant the portion of the recording presented to the model at inference
was not the portion the model had been trained on. The rebuilt path applies the
training rule exactly, as described in section 5.

The second defect was inference-only image processing. A helper applied
sharpening and a five percent brightness increase to frames before prediction.
This processing was never applied to the training data, so it introduced a
systematic difference between what the model learned from and what it was asked
to classify. It ran in one of the two deployment files but not the other, so
the two paths did not even agree with each other. The rebuilt path applies no
such processing and passes crops to the grid exactly as dlib produces them.

The third defect was a stale frame hazard. The directory holding cropped frames
was never emptied between runs. If a run produced fewer than sixty crops, crops
from the previous recording remained on disk, and the grid was then assembled
from a mixture of two different recordings without any error being raised. The
rebuilt path clears the entire runtime directory at the start of every capture,
and the cropping routine additionally clears its own output directory before
writing, so a grid can only ever contain frames from the current recording.

The fourth defect was a crash in the gesture handling. A filename variable was
assigned in the branch that handled the open hand gesture and referenced in the
branch that handled the closed fist, so showing a fist before an open hand
raised a NameError. The rebuilt path writes no video file at all, so the
variable does not exist, and a finished flag ends the session after a single
open hand to fist cycle, which means a fist shown first does nothing and a
second recording cannot begin by accident.


11. Sentence generation
-----------------------
Once a word has been recognised, a fine-tuned T5-small model generates a
sentence containing it. This part of the system was not rebuilt. The saved
model from the original project is used unchanged, and its recorded test loss,
perplexity, BLEU, METEOR and Distinct-1 figures continue to describe it
accurately.

The prompt format and the generation settings were recovered from the original
deployment notebook so that the model receives input in the form it was
fine-tuned on. The prompt is the phrase "Generate a sentence for", followed by
the predicted word and a colon. Generation uses sampling with a maximum length
of 20 tokens, top-k of 50 and top-p of 0.9.

One setting was changed. The original temperature of 0.9 was lowered to 0.6
after comparing twenty sample sentences generated across four combinations of
temperature and top-k. At 0.9 the model produced sentences that were
grammatical but frequently incoherent, placing a cup inside another cup or
serving fish in a refrigerator. At 0.6 the sentences read as ordinary English
in nine cases out of ten, without the loss of variety that tighter sampling
often causes. Narrowing top-k was tried at the same time and did not help.

This change should be understood for what it is. It alters only how the model
is sampled at inference time. It does not alter the model, and it does not
change any of the recorded metrics, which were computed at the original
settings and remain the measured description of the model's performance.

Sentence quality varies noticeably by word. Concrete nouns such as cup, fish
and red produce natural sentences. The adjective hot produces sentences that
repeat the word two or three times and often make little sense. This is
consistent with the recorded Distinct-1 figure of 0.0120, which already
indicated heavily repetitive output, and it is a property of the fine-tuned
model rather than something the sampling settings can correct.


12. Extracting the pipeline into a shared module
------------------------------------------------
The pipeline functions were originally written as notebook cells. When work
began on the desktop application it became clear that an application cannot
import from a notebook, so the logic would either have to be duplicated or
moved somewhere both could use. Duplication was rejected because two copies of
the same functions drift apart over time.

The functions were therefore moved into src/pipeline.py, which holds runtime
clearing, frame normalisation, lip cropping and gap filling, mouth box
measurement, grid assembly, model loading, word prediction and sentence
generation. Both the notebook and the desktop application import from this
module, so the two run identical logic by construction rather than by
inspection.

Three changes were made during the move. Each function gained a flag that
suppresses its printed output, so that the application can call it silently
while the notebook still reports each step. The dlib detector and predictor now
load on first use rather than when the module is imported, and TensorFlow and
the transformers library are imported inside the functions that need them, so
that importing the module remains fast. The runtime clearing function now
creates the runtime directories before attempting to empty them, which removes
a failure that occurred when the directory did not yet exist.

Paths were centralised at the same time in src/config.py, which derives the
project root from its own location rather than being hardcoded. This replaced
an absolute path that would only have worked on one machine.

The notebook as it stood before this change, with every function defined
inline, is preserved at src/archive/lip_reading_inference_demo_standalone.ipynb.
It is kept because it shows the pipeline being built up one step at a time,
which is easier to follow than a set of imports.


13. Status
----------
The live path from webcam capture to CNN word prediction runs end to end on
Windows, CPU only.